README.md, before:

::: {align="center"}
# parsEO

**parsEO** is a Python toolkit that parses existing Earth Observation filenames into structured metadata and assembles new filenames from validated fields. Filename rules live in JSON schemas, turning the repository into a single source of truth for product nomenclature.
:::

## Why parsEO?

-   **Bidirectional workflows** – convert filenames to Python dictionaries and rebuild filenames from the same fields.
-   **Schema-driven** – JSON schemas define every product token, validation rule, and STAC link. Drop in a new schema file and it is discovered automatically.
-   **Extensible** – contributions focus on data, not glue code. Adding support for a new mission only requires a schema.

## Supported product families

-   **Sentinel missions** – S1, S2, S3, S4, S5P, S6
-   **Landsat** – LT04, LT05, LE07, LC08, LC09
-   **NASA MODIS** – Terra and Aqua MODIS products
-   **EUMETSAT missions** – MTG, Metop
-   **Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS)**
    -   Corine Land Cover (CLC) and CLC+ Raster
    -   European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) Level 2 basic/calibrated products, Level 3 velocity grid, and GNSS model
    -   Urban Atlas Land Cover / Land Use
    -   High Resolution Vegetation Phenology & Productivity (HR-VPP): Seasonal Trajectories (PPI) and Vegetation Indices (FAPAR, LAI, NDVI, PPI, FCOVER, DMP)
    -   High Resolution Water & Snow / Ice (HR-WSI): CC, FSC, GFSC, ICD, SWS, WDS, WIC, WIC-COMB, SP_S2, SP_COMB
    -   High Resolution Layers (HRL): Forest Type, Grassland, Imperviousness, Non-Vegetated Land Cover Characteristics, Tree Cover Density, Water & Wetness, Small Woody Features

## Installation

``` bash
pip install parseo
```

For development installs:

``` bash
git clone https://github.com/MatMatt/parsEO.git
cd parsEO
pip install -e .
```

Confirm the CLI is available:

``` bash
parseo --version
```

## Quick start

### Parse a filename

``` python
from parseo import parse_auto

name = "S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE"
result = parse_auto(name)

print(result.valid)   # True
print(result.fields)  # structured dict of extracted fields
```

Another example using a MODIS filename:

``` python
from parseo import parse_auto

name = "MOD09GA.A2021123.h18v04.006.2021132234506.hdf"
result = parse_auto(name)

print(result.fields["platform"])  # MOD
print(result.fields["product"])   # 09
print(result.fields["variant"])   # GA
```

The MODIS schema advertises the Processing, Sat, Raster, and Electro-Optical STAC extensions, enabling automated STAC metadata generation (`processing`, `sat`, `raster`, `eo`).

### Assemble a filename

``` python
from parseo import assemble, assemble_auto

fields = {
    "platform": "S2B",
    "instrument": "MSI",
    "processing_level": "L2A",
    "sensing_datetime": "20241123T224759",
    "processing_baseline": "N0511",
    "relative_orbit": "R101",
    "mgrs_tile": "T03VUL",  # MGRS tile (TxxYYY, e.g. T32TNS)
    "generation_datetime": "20241123T230829",
    "extension": "SAFE",
}

assemble_auto(fields)
# 'S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE'

assemble(fields, family="S2")
# Uses the default (current) Sentinel-2 schema for quicker resolution.

assemble(fields, family="S2", version="1.0.0")
# Lock both family and schema version explicitly.
```

To force a specific schema file:

``` python
from pathlib import Path
from parseo import assemble

schema_path = Path("src/parseo/schemas/copernicus/sentinel/s2/s2_filename_v1_0_0.json")
filename = assemble(fields, schema_path=schema_path)
```

`parse_auto` reports the schema version and lifecycle status that were used:

``` python
from parseo import parse_auto

result = parse_auto("S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE")
print(result.version)  # '1.0.0'
print(result.status)   # 'current'
```

### Command-line interface

The same functionality is exposed through the CLI.

``` bash
# Parse a filename
parseo parse S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE

# Assemble using a JSON document with the required fields
cat fields.json | parseo assemble --family S2 --fields-json -

# Parse a Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) filename
parseo parse ST_20240101T123045_S2_E15N45-03035-010m_V100_PPI.tif

# Assemble the same CLMS filename from key=value pairs
parseo assemble --family VPP \
  prefix=ST \
  timestamp=20240101T123045 \
  sensor=S2 \
  laea_tile=E15N45-01234 \
  resolution=010m \
  version=V100 \
  variable=PPI \
  extension=tif
```

### Working with specific schema versions

When multiple schema versions are present, parsEO chooses the one whose `status` is `"current"`. If none are marked current, the highest `schema_version` wins. You can always pin a schema by passing `schema_path` to `assemble` or `parse`.

## Authoring new Schema

Adding a schema requires only a JSON document under `src/parseo/schemas/`. Start from an existing product schema or the skeleton in `template/`.

-   **Create the product directory** – `src/parseo/schemas/<family>/<mission>/<product>/` (only the family level is mandatory).

-   **Write the versioned schema file** – `<product>_filename_vX_Y_Z.json` with required metadata (`schema_id`, `schema_version`, `status`, optional `stac_version`, `stac_extensions`, and `description`).

-   **Maintain versions** – mark the latest schema as `"current"` and move older ones to `"deprecated"` (or similar). parsEO uses these flags to pick defaults.

### Container Object `fields`

**`fields`** is a container object to define filename tokens and translation mechanisms from/to STAC. Each `property` combines JSON Schema keywords (`type`, `pattern`, `enum`, …) and optional documentation. The `property name` is the variable name used by the `template` container and unless a `stac_map` is applied also what is retrieved by `parseo parse` or fed into `parseo assemble`.

``` json
"fields": { 
  "property-1": {
    "type": "string", 
    "enum": ["A","B"], 
    "description": "descripton of property 1"
  },
  "property-2": {
    "type": "string", 
    "pattern": "^(\d{8}T\d{6})$", 
    "description": "descripton of property 2"
  },
  ...
}
```

#### `type`

The keyword `type` is currently set to "string" by default, and used as best practice.

#### `enum` or `pattern`

-   Use `enum` for short, controlled vocabularies such as file extensions or processing modes (`["A","B"]`). It keeps validation strict and self-documenting.
-   Use `pattern` for structured tokens like timestamps (`^\d{8}T\d{6}$`), version identifiers (`^V\d{3}$`), or grid identifiers (`^h\d{2}v\d{2}$`).

#### `oneOf`

Use `oneOf` to express mutually exclusive validation branches for a single field. Each branch can provide its own JSON Schema keywords, enabling concise modelling of tokens that admit multiple formats. For example, a `variant` token may allow either a fixed set of legacy values or a future-proof pattern:

``` json
"variant": {
  "type": "string",
  "oneOf": [
    {"enum": ["A", "B", "C"]},
    {"pattern": "^X\d{2}$"},
    {"pattern": "^z\d{4}$"}
  ],
  "description": "Legacy letters or experimental codes"
}
```

When `parseo parse` runs, the value is checked against each branch in order until one succeeds. `parseo assemble` accepts any value satisfying at least one branch, allowing schemas to stay expressive without duplicating fields.

#### `stack_map`

Functionality to connect filename tokens to STAC properties in case of incompatibility. In the following example `parseo parse` matches the filename field `prefix` but returns the STAC compliant `platform` and `instrument`. `parseo assemble` must be provided with `platform` and `instrument` and converts it to the correct `prefix` as defined by the filename `template`.

``` json
"prefix": {
  "type": "string",
  "pattern": "^(MOD|MYD|MCD)$",
  "stac_map": {
    "MOD": {
      "platform": "Terra", 
      "instrument": "MODIS"
    },
    "MYD": {
      "platform": "Aqua", 
      "instrument": "MODIS"
    },
    "MCD": {
      "platform": "Combined", 
      "instrument": "MODIS"
    }
  }
}
```

The next example uses capture groups (`$1`, `$2`, …). While `tile` is matched in the filename `parseo parse` returns `tile`, `horizontal_grid`, and `vertical_grid` (and `parseo assemble` requires).

``` json
"tile": {
  "type": "string",
  "pattern": "^(h\d{2})(v\d{2})$",
  "stac_map": {
    "tile": "$0",
    "horizontal_grid": "$1",
    "vertical_grid": "$2"
  }
}
```

#### Container Object `template`

A filename is assembled/parsed based on the definition put into `template` container object. E.g.:

``` json
"template": "{variable}-C{reference_year}_R{resolution}_{tile_id}{epsg_code}_{version}[.{extension}]"
```

`fields` are added to the `template` using the `{property name}`. The template further decides for the fields are arranged and how they are separated from each other. Further it is possible to ad permanent elements as well, e.g. adding a prefix `C` to the `{reference_year} = C{reference_year}` to match e.g. 'C2012'. This can be particularly useful if you are interested in only parts of the field, e.g. by doping `EPSG{epsg_code}` you fetch only the code itself. This can also be a regex, e.g. `..._(S|C){reference_year}_...`.

Optional filenames must be encapsulated in `[]`. E.g. `[.{extension}]`

#### Container Object `examples` 

Populate `"examples"` with valid filenames covering typical combinations of optional tokens. Test routines will run the examples to assess the proper functioning.

### Test round-trips

run `parseo parse <filename>` and `parseo assemble --schema <schema_path>` to confirm the schema behaves as expected.

## Contributing

-   Place new schemas under `src/parseo/schemas/<product_family>/`.
-   Include at least one positive example in each schema file.
-   Run the test-suite with `pytest` (and `ruff check .` for linting) before opening a pull request.
-   Submit a pull request describing the new products or fixes.

## License

This project is licensed under the [European Union Public Licence v1.2](LICENSE.txt).

Commit message:

feat(cli): add schema filters

README.md, after:

::: {align="center"}
# parsEO

**parsEO** is a Python toolkit that parses existing Earth Observation filenames into structured metadata and assembles new filenames from validated fields. Filename rules live in JSON schemas, turning the repository into a single source of truth for product nomenclature.
:::

## Why parsEO?

-   **Bidirectional workflows** – convert filenames to Python dictionaries and rebuild filenames from the same fields.
-   **Schema-driven** – JSON schemas define every product token, validation rule, and STAC link. Drop in a new schema file and it is discovered automatically.
-   **Extensible** – contributions focus on data, not glue code. Adding support for a new mission only requires a schema.

## Supported product families

-   **Sentinel missions** – S1, S2, S3, S4, S5P, S6
-   **Landsat** – LT04, LT05, LE07, LC08, LC09
-   **NASA MODIS** – Terra and Aqua MODIS products
-   **EUMETSAT missions** – MTG, Metop
-   **Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS)**
    -   Corine Land Cover (CLC) and CLC+ Raster
    -   European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) Level 2 basic/calibrated products, Level 3 velocity grid, and GNSS model
    -   Urban Atlas Land Cover / Land Use
    -   High Resolution Vegetation Phenology & Productivity (HR-VPP): Seasonal Trajectories (PPI) and Vegetation Indices (FAPAR, LAI, NDVI, PPI, FCOVER, DMP)
    -   High Resolution Water & Snow / Ice (HR-WSI): CC, FSC, GFSC, ICD, SWS, WDS, WIC, WIC-COMB, SP_S2, SP_COMB
    -   High Resolution Layers (HRL): Forest Type, Grassland, Imperviousness, Non-Vegetated Land Cover Characteristics, Tree Cover Density, Water & Wetness, Small Woody Features

## Installation

``` bash
pip install parseo
```

For development installs:

``` bash
git clone https://github.com/MatMatt/parsEO.git
cd parsEO
pip install -e .
```

Confirm the CLI is available:

``` bash
parseo --version
```

## Quick start

### Parse a filename

``` python
from parseo import parse_auto

name = "S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE"
result = parse_auto(name)

print(result.valid)   # True
print(result.fields)  # structured dict of extracted fields
```

Another example using a MODIS filename:

``` python
from parseo import parse_auto

name = "MOD09GA.A2021123.h18v04.006.2021132234506.hdf"
result = parse_auto(name)

print(result.fields["platform"])  # MOD
print(result.fields["product"])   # 09
print(result.fields["variant"])   # GA
```

The MODIS schema advertises the Processing, Sat, Raster, and Electro-Optical STAC extensions, enabling automated STAC metadata generation (`processing`, `sat`, `raster`, `eo`).

### Assemble a filename

``` python
from parseo import assemble, assemble_auto

fields = {
    "platform": "S2B",
    "instrument": "MSI",
    "processing_level": "L2A",
    "sensing_datetime": "20241123T224759",
    "processing_baseline": "N0511",
    "relative_orbit": "R101",
    "mgrs_tile": "T03VUL",  # MGRS tile (TxxYYY, e.g. T32TNS)
    "generation_datetime": "20241123T230829",
    "extension": "SAFE",
}

assemble_auto(fields)
# 'S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE'

assemble(fields, family="S2")
# Uses the default (current) Sentinel-2 schema for quicker resolution.

assemble(fields, family="S2", version="1.0.0")
# Lock both family and schema version explicitly.
```

To force a specific schema file:

``` python
from pathlib import Path
from parseo import assemble

schema_path = Path("src/parseo/schemas/copernicus/sentinel/s2/s2_filename_v1_0_0.json")
filename = assemble(fields, schema_path=schema_path)
```

`parse_auto` reports the schema version and lifecycle status that were used:

``` python
from parseo import parse_auto

result = parse_auto("S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE")
print(result.version)  # '1.0.0'
print(result.status)   # 'current'
```

### Command-line interface

The same functionality is exposed through the CLI.

``` bash
# Parse a filename
parseo parse S2B_MSIL2A_20241123T224759_N0511_R101_T03VUL_20241123T230829.SAFE

# Assemble using a JSON document with the required fields
cat fields.json | parseo assemble --family S2 --fields-json -

# Parse a Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) filename
parseo parse ST_20240101T123045_S2_E15N45-03035-010m_V100_PPI.tif

# Assemble the same CLMS filename from key=value pairs
parseo assemble --family VPP \
  prefix=ST \
  timestamp=20240101T123045 \
  sensor=S2 \
  laea_tile=E15N45-01234 \
  resolution=010m \
  version=V100 \
  variable=PPI \
  extension=tif
```

### Discover available schemas

List every schema that ships with parsEO, including the mission family, semantic version, lifecycle status, and file location:

``` bash
parseo list-schemas
```

The command prints a table summarizing all discovered schemas, making it easy to confirm which versions are available before parsing or assembling filenames.

List only the schemas that are marked as `current` with the built-in filter (works on every platform):

``` bash
parseo list-schemas --status current
```

To inspect a single family in the summary table, provide the family name explicitly:

``` bash
parseo list-schemas --family S2
```

For the full schema metadata (fields, examples, etc.), use `schema-info`:

``` bash
parseo schema-info S2
```

### Working with specific schema versions

When multiple schema versions are present, parsEO chooses the one whose `status` is `"current"`. If none are marked current, the highest `schema_version` wins. You can always pin a schema by passing `schema_path` to `assemble` or `parse`.

## Authoring new Schema

Adding a schema requires only a JSON document under `src/parseo/schemas/`. Start from an existing product schema or the skeleton in `template/`.

-   **Create the product directory** – `src/parseo/schemas/<family>/<mission>/<product>/` (only the family level is mandatory).

-   **Write the versioned schema file** – `<product>_filename_vX_Y_Z.json` with required metadata (`schema_id`, `schema_version`, `status`, optional `stac_version`, `stac_extensions`, and `description`).

-   **Maintain versions** – mark the latest schema as `"current"` and move older ones to `"deprecated"` (or similar). parsEO uses these flags to pick defaults.

### Container Object `fields`

**`fields`** is a container object to define filename tokens and translation mechanisms from/to STAC. Each `property` combines JSON Schema keywords (`type`, `pattern`, `enum`, …) and optional documentation. The `property name` is the variable name used by the `template` container and unless a `stac_map` is applied also what is retrieved by `parseo parse` or fed into `parseo assemble`.

``` json
"fields": { 
  "property-1": {
    "type": "string", 
    "enum": ["A","B"], 
    "description": "descripton of property 1"
  },
  "property-2": {
    "type": "string", 
    "pattern": "^(\d{8}T\d{6})$", 
    "description": "descripton of property 2"
  },
  ...
}
```

#### `type`

The keyword `type` is currently set to "string" by default, and used as best practice.

#### `enum` or `pattern`

-   Use `enum` for short, controlled vocabularies such as file extensions or processing modes (`["A","B"]`). It keeps validation strict and self-documenting.
-   Use `pattern` for structured tokens like timestamps (`^\d{8}T\d{6}$`), version identifiers (`^V\d{3}$`), or grid identifiers (`^h\d{2}v\d{2}$`).

#### `oneOf`

Use `oneOf` to express mutually exclusive validation branches for a single field. Each branch can provide its own JSON Schema keywords, enabling concise modelling of tokens that admit multiple formats. For example, a `variant` token may allow either a fixed set of legacy values or a future-proof pattern:

``` json
"variant": {
  "type": "string",
  "oneOf": [
    {"enum": ["A", "B", "C"]},
    {"pattern": "^X\d{2}$"},
    {"pattern": "^z\d{4}$"}
  ],
  "description": "Legacy letters or experimental codes"
}
```

When `parseo parse` runs, the value is checked against each branch in order until one succeeds. `parseo assemble` accepts any value satisfying at least one branch, allowing schemas to stay expressive without duplicating fields.

#### `stack_map`

Functionality to connect filename tokens to STAC properties in case of incompatibility. In the following example `parseo parse` matches the filename field `prefix` but returns the STAC compliant `platform` and `instrument`. `parseo assemble` must be provided with `platform` and `instrument` and converts it to the correct `prefix` as defined by the filename `template`.

``` json
"prefix": {
  "type": "string",
  "pattern": "^(MOD|MYD|MCD)$",
  "stac_map": {
    "MOD": {
      "platform": "Terra", 
      "instrument": "MODIS"
    },
    "MYD": {
      "platform": "Aqua", 
      "instrument": "MODIS"
    },
    "MCD": {
      "platform": "Combined", 
      "instrument": "MODIS"
    }
  }
}
```

The next example uses capture groups (`$1`, `$2`, …). While `tile` is matched in the filename `parseo parse` returns `tile`, `horizontal_grid`, and `vertical_grid` (and `parseo assemble` requires).

``` json
"tile": {
  "type": "string",
  "pattern": "^(h\d{2})(v\d{2})$",
  "stac_map": {
    "tile": "$0",
    "horizontal_grid": "$1",
    "vertical_grid": "$2"
  }
}
```

#### Container Object `template`

A filename is assembled/parsed based on the definition put into `template` container object. E.g.:

``` json
"template": "{variable}-C{reference_year}_R{resolution}_{tile_id}{epsg_code}_{version}[.{extension}]"
```

`fields` are added to the `template` using the `{property name}`. The template further decides for the fields are arranged and how they are separated from each other. Further it is possible to ad permanent elements as well, e.g. adding a prefix `C` to the `{reference_year} = C{reference_year}` to match e.g. 'C2012'. This can be particularly useful if you are interested in only parts of the field, e.g. by doping `EPSG{epsg_code}` you fetch only the code itself. This can also be a regex, e.g. `..._(S|C){reference_year}_...`.

Optional filenames must be encapsulated in `[]`. E.g. `[.{extension}]`

#### Container Object `examples` 

Populate `"examples"` with valid filenames covering typical combinations of optional tokens. Test routines will run the examples to assess the proper functioning.

### Test round-trips

run `parseo parse <filename>` and `parseo assemble --schema <schema_path>` to confirm the schema behaves as expected.

## Contributing

-   Place new schemas under `src/parseo/schemas/<product_family>/`.
-   Include at least one positive example in each schema file.
-   Run the test-suite with `pytest` (and `ruff check .` for linting) before opening a pull request.
-   Submit a pull request describing the new products or fixes.

## License

This project is licensed under the [European Union Public Licence v1.2](LICENSE.txt).
